IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
193
Unlocking Reconﬁgurability for Deep Reinforcement
Learning in SFC Provisioning
Murat Arda Onsu, Poonam Lohan, Member, IEEE, Burak Kantarci
, Senior Member, IEEE,
Emil Janulewicz
, and Sergio Slobodrian
Abstract—Network function virtualization (NFV) is a key
foundational technology for 5G and beyond networks, wherein to
offer network services, execution of Virtual Network Functions
(VNFs) in a deﬁned sequence is crucial for high-quality Service
Function Chaining (SFC) provisioning. To provide fast, reli-
able, and automatic VNFs placement, Machine Learning (ML)
algorithms such as Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) are
widely being investigated. However, due to the requirement of
ﬁxed-size inputs in DRL models, these algorithms are highly
dependent on network conﬁguration such as the number of
data centers (DCs) where VNFs can be placed and the logical
connections among DCs. In this letter, a novel approach using the
DRL technique is proposed for SFC provisioning which unlocks
the reconﬁgurability of the networks, i.e., the same proposed
model can be applied in different network conﬁgurations without
additional training. Moreover, an advanced Deep Neural Network
(DNN) architecture is constructed for DRL with an attention
layer that improves the performance of SFC provisioning while
considering the efﬁcient resource utilization and the End-to-End
(E2E) delay of SFC requests by looking up their priority points.
Numerical results demonstrate that the proposed model surpasses
the baseline heuristic method with an increase in the overall
SFC acceptance ratio by 20.3% and a reduction in resource
consumption and E2E delay by 50% and 42.65%, respectively.
Index Terms—SFC provisioning, NFV, VNF-placement, deep-Q
learning, 5G and beyond network, priority points.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE RATIONALE for Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) is shifting physical network equipment to general-
purpose hardware, which is known as data centers (DCs), and
running Virtual network functions (VNFs) on virtual machines
installed in these DCs [1], [2]. Some primary VNFs can
be listed as Network Address Translation (NAT), Firewall
(FW), Intrusion Detection and Prevention System (IDPS),
WAN Optimizer (WO), Video Optimization Controller (VOC),
and Trafﬁc Monitor (TM), etc. These VNFs can be chained
Manuscript received 26 April 2024; accepted 10 May 2024. Date of
publication 13 May 2024; date of current version 25 October 2024. This
work was supported in part by the Mitacs Accelerate Program under Project
IT32016, and in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC) Alliance ALLRP 576762—22 Project and
NSERC CREATE TRAVERSAL Program. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was N. Passas.
(Corresponding author: Burak Kantarci.)
Murat Arda Onsu, Poonam Lohan, and Burak Kantarci are with the
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada (e-mail: monsu022@uottawa.ca;
ppoonam@uottawa.ca; burak.kantarci@uottawa.ca).
Emil Janulewicz is with the Product Line Management, Ciena, Kanata, ON
K2K 2P5, Canada (e-mail: ejanulew@ciena.com).
Sergio Slobodrian is with the Ofﬁce of the CTO, Ciena, Kanata, ON K2K
2P5, Canada (e-mail: sslobodr@ciena.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LNET.2024.3400764
in a particular order to create Service Function Chaining
(SFC) requests to provide specialized network services such
as Cloud Gaming (CG), Augmented Reality (AR), Video
Streaming (VS), VoIP, Massive IoT (MIoT), and Industry 4.0
(Ind 4.0) [3]. SFC Provisioning entails some key challenges
like sequential VNF execution, efﬁcient resource utilization,
massive demands handling, and End-to-End (E2E) delay con-
straints [4], [5].
In [6], researchers studied delay-aware VNF migration
for embedding SFCs in a network with limited processing
resources. A queuing-based system model with latency as a
KPI is proposed in [7]. In [8], DRL combined with graph neu-
ral networks optimizes VNF placement for resource utilization
and QoS. Load balancing of SFC provisioning in Fog networks
is explored in [5]. Deep Learning (DL) and RL algorithms
are highly suitable for addressing SFC provisioning with VNF
placement challenges. These models can develop advanced
methods while prioritizing minimal resource usage and E2E
delay [9], [10], offering potential beneﬁts for various practical
applications such as SFC provisioning in 5G Core Networks.
The DL model requires a ﬁxed size of input states, which will
be the information about the environment, such as incoming
SFC demands, DCs’ resources, logical links availability, etc.
Furthermore, the output of the model indicates the action
spaces of the DRL algorithm. Therefore, model architecture
highly relies on the network conﬁguration and parameters.
Although DRL models with near-optimal performance for
VNF placements have been studied, running these models
with different network conﬁgurations (NCs) is not well-studied
in literature. Following upon updates in NCs, such as the
addition or removal of DCs and logical links among them, the
inputs and outputs of the model are impacted; for example,
adding more DCs increases the input size and action space.
Therefore, model architecture should be changed to adapt
to these changes, and the new model needs to be trained
from the beginning, which is time-consuming. To the best
of our knowledge, this letter is the ﬁrst one to unlock the
reconﬁgurability of the DRL-based model for efﬁcient SFC
provisioning which allows the same proposed DRL model to
be utilized in different network conﬁgurations (NCs) without
retraining it. The four-fold contributions of this letter are as
follows:
• A novel DRL architecture, which includes multiple input
states, is proposed for the SFC provisioning task. Its
initial layer consists of three different input layers, which
are concatenated in one point of the model to avoid any
information loss or inefﬁciency in computation due to
their different dimensions and attributes.
• Each DC is assigned priority points based on its resource
availability, its occurrence from source to destination
path, and already installed and allocated VNF functions
on it. Furthermore, the VNFs are prioritized for placement
2576-3156 c⃝2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: CSIRO Information Technology Services. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 06:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
194
IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
Fig. 1.
SFC demand creation, DRL model and training.
based on their SFC type, their order in the SFC chain,
and E2E delay constraints.
• The proposed model can handle massive amounts of
different SFC requests with efﬁcient and sequential VNF
placements in the chains. It provides high SFC acceptance
ratio with low resource consumption while fulﬁlling the
stringent E2E delay constraints of SFC requests. The
trained model can be utilized under different NCs.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. System Model and Characteristics of SFCs and VNFs
Fig. 1 illustrates the network environment which consists
of multiple data centers (DCs) connecting with base stations
through which users’ equipment can put their different types
of service requests to the network. All DCs are considered
VNF-instance (VNFI)-enabled, i.e., VNFs can be installed
and allocated to different SFC requests by DCs as per the
requirements depending on their computational and storage
resource availability. Further, we consider that all types of SFC
requests coming to the network are in the form of request
bundles, i.e., multiple different types of users’ requests are
considered to address massive demands which network should
be able to handle within their E2E delay limit. Hence, the
VNF placement and resource utilization should be efﬁcient
enough to maximize the acceptance ratio (AccRatio) of the
SFC requests. The considered network topology is mapped
to graph G(N, L), where N and L denote the set of VNFI-
enabled DCs and logical links among nodes, respectively.
The matrix W = |N|X |N| represents the distance weight
of logical links among DCs, where the matrix element wij
represents the distance weight between DCs i and j in the
network. The bandwidth (BW) capacity of the link between
DCs i and j is denoted by Bij Mbps. The computational
capacity of DC i ∈N is represented by Qi →cycles/sec
based on the number of CPUs and RAM resources in DC. Si
represents the storage capacity of DC i ∈N in GB. Now, we
discuss the characteristics of SFC Requests and VNFs.The set
of service types supported by the service provider is denoted
by S = {CG, AR, VS, VoIP, MIoT, Ind 4.0}. Please note SFC
types or tags are deﬁned based on this set. The set of all VNFs
is presented by V = {NAT, FW, VOC, TM, WO, IDPS}.
Fs = (f s
1 →f s
2 →· · · f s
Ns) for s ∈S represents a sequence of
Ns VNFs to be executed for successful completion of request
s ∈S. Furthermore, characteristics of each service request s ∈
S is deﬁned by a tuple {Fs, Bs, Ds, λs}, where Bs denotes
BW requirement, Ds denoted E2E Delay tolerance, and λs
denotes the request bundle size. We used the most commonly
referenced six SFCs or service requests of the literature [11]
as outlined in Table I with their characteristics tuple. Also,
Table II demonstrates the resource requirements in terms of
CPUs, RAM, and Storage resources and the processing time
TABLE I
SERVICE FUNCTION CHAIN (SFC) CHARACTERISTICS [10]
TABLE II
VIRTUAL NETWORK FUNCTION CHARACTERISTICS [10]
for each VNF [11]. It is assumed that multiple same or
different VNFI can be placed/installed to each DC and can
be allocated to different SFC requests s ∈S. To process a
particular VNF of an SFC, the same type VNFI should be
installed in a DC, and that VNFI must be allocated to that
particular VNF till its processing time is over. Another VNF
of the same type from a different SFC can be allocated to that
VNFI after the previously allocated VNF processing is over
or it can use another free installed VNFI of its type. nv
i is
an integer variable representing the number of VNFI v ∈V
placed on DC i ∈N. The computational, storage resource
requirement, and processing time for VNFI v ∈V are denoted
by C v, S v, and tv respectively.
B. Problem Formulation
With As denoting the number of SFC requests served of
type s ∈S, the AccRatio, Ar = 
s∈S As/
s∈S λs, can be
deﬁned as the total number of all types of SFC requests served
within their E2E delay limit divided by the total number of
generated requests by all types of request bundles. Now, the
mathematical formulation for SFCs’ AccRatio maximization
is represented as follows:
(P): maximize
n,δ
Ar
s. t. : (C1):

v∈V
nv
i C v ≤Qi, ∀i ∈N
(C2):

v∈V
nv
i S v ≤Si, ∀i ∈N
(C3):

i∈N
δ
f s
k
i 1

n
f s
k
i
> 0

= 1, ∀s ∈S, ∀k = 1, 2, . . . , Ns
(C4):

λs∀s∈S
Ns−1

k=1
δ
f s
k
i δ
f s
k+1
j
Bs ≤Bij , ∀i, j ∈N, i ̸= j
(C5): ts
Pg + ts
Pr ≤Ds ; ∀s ∈S
Here, constraints (C1) and (C2), respectively, state that
the computational and storage capacity of the placed VNFIs
should not be greater than the total computational and storage
capacity of DCs. Constraint (C3) ensures that each VNF
function in SFCR s should be processed by only one DC;
where, δf s
k
i
is a binary variable which is set equal to 1 if
kth VNF in SFC s is processed at node i with condition
Authorized licensed use limited to: CSIRO Information Technology Services. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 06:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
ONSU et al.: UNLOCKING RECONFIGURABILITY FOR DRL IN SFC PROVISIONING
195
(nf s
k
ic
> 0); otherwise, it is set to zero. Constraint (C4)
is related to logical link BW constraint and states that the
BW resource occupied by SFCRs should not exceed the BW
capacity of logical links. Lastly, constraint (C5) conﬁrms that
for successful completion of the SFC request the propagation
and processing delay of SFC should not be more than the E2E
delay tolerance limit of that SFC request. Propagation delay,
ts
Pg = Ns−1
k=1

i∈N

j∈N δf s
k
i δ
f s
k+1
j
tP
ij , depends upon the
distance between VNF serving nodes in SFC request s and
the speed of light as normally the optical ﬁber is used to
provide a logical link among DCs, i.e., tP
ij
= wij /c with
c = 3 ∗108km/s, i.e., equal to the speed of light. Processing
delay, ts
Pr = Ns
k=1

i∈N δf s
k
i (wf s
k + tf s
k ), depends upon the
waiting time, wf s
k , before allocation and processing time, tf s
k ,
of different VNF functions to be executed in the SFC request
s ∈S. The optimization problem P is combinatorial and non-
convex. To solve this problem, we propose a novel DRL-based
SFC provisioning algorithm.
III. DRL ARCHITECTURE AND SFC PROVISIONING
A. Proposed DRL Algorithm and Model Architecture
The Deep Q-Network (DQN) algorithm is applied as an
advanced RL approach that employs deep learning to estimate
the optimal action-value function, often denoted as the Q-
value. The model architecture employs fully connected deep
neural network (FCDNN) layers. It consists of three input lay-
ers designed to accommodate diverse system information types
and dimensions. After passing through the initial FCDNN
layers, these inputs are concatenated to form a uniﬁed input.
Subsequently, an attention layer is applied to highlight signif-
icant features within this combined input. The state serves as
input, while the DQN model generates actions. Based on these
actions, an agent can receive rewards and Q-values, aiming to
maximize the action-value function during the update phase.
1) State Deﬁnition: In RL, the state, representing environ-
ment information and input, is updated after each action and
DRL employs a DNN that requires inputs in array format with
consistent shape and size. However, SFC Provisioning involves
diverse state information, posing a challenge for integration
due to varying sizes and features. To ensure information
integrity, multiple input layers are created for DRL models.
In this letter, three input layers are created for state
information: the ﬁrst and second inputs describe the chosen
DC with the highest priority for action, while the third
input provides information on overall SFC requests in the
environment. (i) The ﬁrst input state provides the total number
of installed VNFs and VNFs available to be allocated for each
type, along with available storage and computational power,
for speciﬁc DC, which model acts. The matrix dimension of
the ﬁrst input state is [1 × (2 ∗|V | + 2)]. (ii) The second
input state is related to SFCs processing stages by that speciﬁc
DC. For an SFC request, If any VNF function is allocated
in that DC, state information shows the SFC request type,
already allocated VNF functions, and the remaining VNF
functions waiting for allocation in the chain of that SFC
request. This information is presented for all types of SFC
requests. Hence, the matrix dimension of the second input
state is [|S| × (1 + 2 ∗|V |)]. (iii) Lastly, the third input state
provides information about all types of pending SFC requests.
It includes information about SFC type, SFC request counts
in each type, remaining minimum E2E latency time, BW
requirement, and the total number of different VNFs waiting
for allocation to serve those SFC request types. The matrix
dimension of the third input state is [|S|×(4+|V |)]. Unlocking
reconﬁgurability means that the DRL model input states are
independent of environmental changes. For our proposed DRL
model, with the change in network conﬁguration, i.e., numbers
of DCs and logical links, the input state dimensions do not
change. The proposed DRL model preserves its input and
output layer architecture and does not need retraining to be
applied to different NCs.
2) Action Deﬁnition: In the proposed DRL model, the
output layer deﬁnes the agent actions, including Uninstall and
Allocation for each VNF type, along with an idle action Wait.
The dimension of the output layer array for actions is [2 ∗
|V | + 1]. Multiple actions can be performed simultaneously
to fulﬁll demands within the same time-stamp.
3) Reward Deﬁnition: The model receives a high reward
when it fulﬁlls SFC requests within the E2E delay limit.
Inability to satisfy a request results in dropped SFCs, and
a penalty is incurred. This penalty is slightly less than the
reward to account for situations where VNF allocation does
not represent a wrong action, even if the SFC is ultimately
dropped. Additionally, uninstalling VNFs required by ongoing
requests incurs a penalty. Selecting invalid actions, such
as attempting to install VNF functions without available
resources, also results in penalties. Invalid actions do not alter
state information, causing the model to remain on the same
action until the next step. The reward function is as follows:
Reward =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
+2.0
if SFC is Satisﬁed
−1.5
if SFC is Dropped
−1.0
if Invalid Action
−0.5
if Uninstallation of RequiredVNF
0
otherwise
4) DRL Model Training: has U (i.e., 350) updates, and
each update is performed after E (i.e., 20) episodes. Each
episode starts with incoming SFC requests and ends once
there are no pending SFC requests. Regarding SFC request
generation, at the onset and intervals of every N, i.e., 4 Steps,
the simulation generates SFC requests randomly within the
speciﬁed range of bundle size B as presented in Table I.
SFC requests are allocated with various source and desti-
nation points. They are removed from the state if they are
either served by allocating all VNF functions in the correct
sequence or dropped due to E2E delay or resource constraints.
Additionally, the number of incoming SFC requests and
data center counts vary in each episode to enhance training
robustness and diversity. The model performs A actions
(i.e., A = 100), during each step, which is of duration T, 1
ms. Every action inference time stamp is 0.01ms. At the end
of each episode, the model stores the state, action, next state,
and reward observation set to the replay memory. In initial
episodes, randomness plays crucial role for training,then in
each episodes number of random actions are decreased and
replaced by deterministic actions.
B. Proposed SFC Provisioning Algorithm
The proposed SFC provisioning solution, outlined as
Algorithm 1, utilizes the DRL model that is discussed in
the previous subsection. Whenever new SFC requests are
generated with their source and destination information, the
model starts running to satisfy these demands by placing
Authorized licensed use limited to: CSIRO Information Technology Services. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 06:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
196
IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
Fig. 2.
Comparison of the proposed DRL-Based SFC provisioning algorithm against the baseline approach.
Algorithm 1: VNF Placement for SFC Provisioning
Data: Overall_SFCs_req_Info, Overall_VNF_Info, Overall_DC_Info
Result: SFCs requests ←accepted or dropped
1 DC_list ←Set_DC_priority(Overall_VNF_Info);
2 DC_id ←dc_list[0];
3 State_1 ←get_Curr_DC_Info(Overall_DC_Info, DC_id);
4 State_2 ←get_DC_SFC_Info(Overall_VNF_Info, DC_id);
5 State_3 ←get_Overall_SFC_Info(Overall_VNF_Info);
6 Action ←DRL_Model(Input_1, Input_2, Input_3);
7 Action_Type ←GetActionType(Action);
8 if Action_Type = Wait then
9
Perform(wait)
10 end
11 if Action_Type = Uninstall then
12
VNF_Type ←GetVNFType(Action);
13
Asserts if any idle function with VNF_Type in Curr_DC;
14
Asserts if no VNF waiting to be allocated with selected
VNF_Type;
15
Perform(Uninstall, DC_id, VNF_Type)$;
16 end
17 if Action_Type = Allocation then
18
VNF_Type ←GetVNFType(Action);
19
Asserts if resources are available for VNF_Type in Curr_DC;
20
Asserts if VNFs waiting to be allocated with selected VNF_Type;
21
VNF_Priority_List ←[];
22
foreach VNFt of VNF_Type ∈Overall_VNF_Info do
23
Priority ←0;
24
P1 ←RemTime(VNFt, T_AfterReq, E2E_Time);
25
P2 ←SFC_based_priority(VNFt, DC_id);
26
P3 ←Urgency(VNFt, T_AfterReq, E2E_Time, Thr);
27
Priority ←P1 + P2 + P3;
28
VNF_Priority_List.insert(VNFt, Priority);
29
end
30
VNF_Selected ←HigestPriority(VNF_Priority_List);
31
Perform(Allocation, DC_id, VNF_Selected);
32 end
33 Rewards, Next_States1,2,3 ←CalculateUpdatedInfo();
34 Replay_Memory ←
[States1,2,3, Action, Rewards, Next_States1,2,3];
and allocating VNFs in the chain to the appropriate DCs.
The DRL model traverses through DCs for efﬁcient VNF
placements. DCs’ iteration order is deﬁned by their priority
points which depend on the available resources and incoming
SFC requests’ E2E delay, and it picks the source DC with
minimum E2E delay SFC requests to the highest priority. The
DCs on the shortest available path based on BW resource
availability between the source and destination of that SFC
request are provided with decreasing priority values. If DCs
do not come on the path, they are put at the end of the iteration
order. The DRL model selects the DC with the highest priority
as its current DC (step 2), and its input states are updated
accordingly (Steps 3-5). The iteration order of DCs is updated
after every action, and the model can visit one DC more than
once during the same step because multiple actions are taken
in one step. Based on the input states, the DRL model provides
the action output (Step 6) for the current DC.
The models’ action space consists of allocation of VNFs,
uninstallation of VNFs, and idle wait. The output of the DRL
model deﬁnes the VNF type on which it will act (Step 7). If
the action output is ‘wait’, no action would be performed in
that time stamp (Steps 8-10). If the action output is ‘uninstall’,
ﬁrst, the VNF type is collected from the output action. It is
checked that there is any idle installed VNF of that type, then
that type VNF is uninstalled to reduce unnecessary resource
consumption of the current DC (Steps 11-16). If the action
output is ‘Allocation’, ﬁrst, the VNF type is extracted from
the model output. Then, the algorithm asserts if the action
is valid by looking up the resource availability and existing
request counts for that VNF type (Steps 17-20). Since many
VNFs may be waiting for allocation, all VNFs of that type
are assigned priority points. The priority point’s main aim
is to give higher priority to the VNF of that SFC request
whose previous VNFs in the chain are already allocated to the
same DC or the SFC request having minimum remaining E2E
latency time. Three different types of points P1, P2, P3 are
used to calculate priority values P = P1 + P2 + P3 (Steps
23-29). (i) The ﬁrst point, P1, depends on the remaining time
to serve that SFC request s, which is calculated by subtracting
the E2E delay tolerance value Ds from the time elapsed
TE s after this SFC request was created P1 = TE s −Ds.
This point increases in every following timestamp. (ii) The
second point, P2, emphasizes the importance of VNF based
on its SFC request. If any of the VNFs in the SFC chain
are installed in the current DC, they have high priority, but
if they are allocated to other DCs, they degrade that VNF’s
priority. (iii) Finally, the third priority point, P3 indicates
VNF’s urgency. If the remaining time to serve its SFC request
is lower than the threshold Thr, then, even if the other VNFs
of the SFC chain are allocated to other DCs, VNF priority
is increased signiﬁcantly for its allocation. It is calculated by
dividing a constant value C by the remaining time, P3 =
C/(Ds −TE s+), is a very small number to avoid division
by zero. Once priority functions assign all VNFs of the output
VNF type, the VNF with the maximum priority is selected
to perform the allocation action. After performing the action,
the reward and next states are updated (Step 34) and stored in
the replay buffer for training the model (Step 35). For testing
purposes, the steps of the algorithm are repeated till the time
there are no pending SFC requests in the network, i.e., either
they are satisﬁed or dropped.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The simulation includes DCs, ﬁber connections as logical
links between DCs, SFCs requests with speciﬁc VNFs chains.
Each DC has a storage capacity of 2 TB, the CPU varies
Authorized licensed use limited to: CSIRO Information Technology Services. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 06:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
ONSU et al.: UNLOCKING RECONFIGURABILITY FOR DRL IN SFC PROVISIONING
197
Fig. 3.
E2E delay and resource consumption for different NCs.
between 12 to 120 GHz, and the RAM is 256 GB, while the
logical links have 1 Gbps BW.
The baseline heuristic model depends on a rule-based
algorithm that starts with placing VNF functions of the SFC
request with minimum E2E latency and continues until all
VNFs of the SFC are placed properly. Then, it proceeds with
placing the VNFs of the next SFC request. Unlike the proposed
model, it does not iterate all DCs but performs its actions by
looking up all network dynamics, including all VNFs and DCs.
However, this baseline algorithm increases model inference
time and constrains the model to perform fewer actions than
the proposed model.
To proposed model is compared to the baseline model
for the same amount of SFC requests and with the same
resources of 4 DCs. Comparison is made in terms of E2E
delay, SFCs requests AccRatio, and resource consumption. For
evaluation, a massive amount of request bundles of different
SFC types are created following the bundle sizes provided
in Table I. These request bundles of different SFC types are
created for 3 consecutive time slots, called 3 request counts
and their compiled AccRatio are illustrated in the middle graph
of Fig. 2. It can be seen that both the heuristic and DRL
model satisfy all CG and VoIP requests. The DRL model
satisﬁes a greater amount of AR and VS than the baseline
model. Moreover, it also handled MIoT and Ind 4.0 better
than heuristic algorithms. Therefore, the DRL model satisﬁes
overall 20.3% more SFC requests with the same resources.
Since each SFC type has a different amount of requests, the
weighted average of AccRatio of all SFC types is presented,
which is 76.93% and 90.08% for baseline and DRL models,
respectively. Hence, there is a 13.14% improvement in the
weighted average AccRatio by the proposed DRL algorithm.
The left graph in Fig. 2 shows the E2E latency for satisﬁed
SFC requests. Since E2E latency tolerance for AR, MIoT, and
Ind 4.0 is less, both algorithms try to handle them ﬁrst; that’s
why latency for these types is almost similar. However, the
DRL model fulﬁlls the rest of these demands much faster than
the baseline model and achieves a 42.65% faster E2E delay.
Finally, since the DRL model can do planning better than
the rule-based model in terms of strategically uninstalling and
allocating VNF functions, it consumes almost 50% less storage
and 10% less computational resources. Since the AccRatio of
AR is lower in the baseline approach and the graph shows E2E
latency only for accepted SFC requests, E2E latency for AR
in the baseline algorithm is slightly lower than DRL model.
To observe the robustness of the proposed DRL model, it is
tested under different NCs. The effect of DCs count on E2E
delay and resource consumption can be seen in Fig. 3. For
each conﬁguration, the proposed model is tested with the same
amount of SFC requests, i.e., 3 request counts. It can be seen
in Fig. 3 that more resources are utilized per DC when the
DCs count is 2, and it decreases as the DCs count increases.
In the same manner, the E2E latency for SFC provisioning
tasks is higher with the lower the DCs count. Since, with more
Fig. 4.
SFCs AccRatio under different SFCs request counts and NCs.
DCs, resources increase to satisfy the SFCs requests and load
per DC decreases.
As demonstrated in the left graph of Fig. 4, the incoming
SFC requests can be handled almost completely with a higher
DCs count. However, with low resources, such as 2 and 4
DCs, the system struggles to satisfy all these demands, and
a lower overall AccRatio can be seen as the request counts
increase. The right side graph in Fig. 4 shows the complied
results up to 3 consecutive request counts for the AccRatio of
every SFC type. Except for a system with 2 DCs, all VoIP and
VS requests are satisﬁed, and CG is also handled completely in
every conﬁguration. Most of the dropped ratio can be observed
for types of AR, MIoT, and Ind 4.0. When the number of DCs
is reduced, it affects an extreme amount of resource reductions,
which prevents VNF functions from being properly installed
and causes a high drop ratio for requests with lower E2E
latency tolerance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, which unlocks the network reconﬁgurability
without retraining the proposed DRL model. SFC requests are
satisﬁed by placing and allocating VNF functions in the proper
chaining sequence to DCs while considering their resource
constraints. With a better strategy of prioritizing DCs and
SFCs having a lower E2E delay tolerance, the proposed model
surpasses the baseline approach in terms of acceptance ratio,
resource consumption, and E2E latency.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Mijumbi et al., “Network function virtualization: State-of-the-art
and research challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 236–262, 1st Quart., 2016.
[2] I. Avgouleas et al., “Virtual network functions scheduling under delay-
weighted pricing,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 160–163,
Dec. 2019.
[3] K. Kaur et al., “A comprehensive survey of service function chain
provisioning approaches in SDN and NFV architecture,” Comput. Sci.
Rev., vol. 38, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 100298.
[4] N. Siasi et al., “Service function chain provisioning schemes for
multi-layer fog networks,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 38–42,
Mar. 2020.
[5] M. A. Jasim et al., “SFC provisioning with load balancing method in
multi-tier fog networks,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 82–86,
Jun. 2022.
[6] M. Setayesh and V. W. Wong, “Service function chain reconﬁguration in
5G core networks using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun.
Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[7] S. Agarwal et al., “Joint VNF placement and CPU allocation in
5G,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2018, pp. 1943–1951.
[8] P. Sun et al., “Combining deep reinforcement learning with graph neural
networks for optimal VNF placement,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett.,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 176–180, Jan. 2021.
[9] D. Lee et al., “Q-learning based service function chaining using VNF
resource-aware reward model,” in Proc. Asia–Paciﬁc Netw. Oper. Manag.
Symp., 2020, pp. 279–282.
[10] N. He et al., “Leveraging deep reinforcement learning with attention
mechanism for virtual network function placement and routing,” IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1186–1201, Apr. 2023.
[11] J. M. Ziazet et al., “A dynamic trafﬁc generator for elastic 5G network
slicing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Meas. Netw., 2022, pp. 1–6.
Authorized licensed use limited to: CSIRO Information Technology Services. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 06:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
